Home
Blog
Store
Team
About
CE
Reviews
Contact
Login
Positive CBT
30 Nov 2025
 273
35+ Powerful CBT Exercises & Techniques for Therapists
9 Apr 2025 by Jeremy Sutton, Ph.D. 
Scientifically reviewed by Maike Neuhaus Ph.D.
Key Insights
12 minute read
CBT exercises help clients identify & reframe unhelpful thoughts.
Tailoring interventions to individual needs boosts therapy effectiveness.
CBT techniques are versatile & effective across anxiety, depression, ADHD & more.
CBT ExercisesFor many clients, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has been life changing, enhancing their psychological wellness, workplace performance, and relationships (Werson et al., 2022).

CBT’s widely researched and structured approach to addressing negative thought patterns and maladaptive behaviors has proven invaluable for helping clients overcome challenges, take control of their lives, and learn to flourish (Dobson & Dozois, 2021; Geschwind et al., 2019).

The challenge, however, is how to bridge theory and practice to help clients translate cognitive behavioral concepts into these meaningful life improvements.

As a positive and performance psychologist, I’ve collaborated with various mental health professionals in developing ways to overcome this challenge. In this article I will share powerful CBT exercises, techniques, and worksheets and offer actionable insights to foster resilience and lasting positive change.

Before you continue, we thought you might like to download our five positive psychology tools for free. These science-based exercises will provide you with detailed insight into Positive CBT and give you the tools to apply it in your therapy or coaching.

This Article Contains
What Is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy?
7 Best CBT Techniques for Therapists
9 Powerful CBT Exercises & Interventions
6 Evidence-Based CBT Worksheets
6 More Cognitive Behavioral Activities for Your Clients
6 Common Challenges & Tips to Overcome Them
Helpful Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Manuals & Workbooks
Resources From PositivePsychology.com
A Take-Home Message
Frequently Asked Questions
References
What Is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy?
CBT has three foundational propositions (Dobson & Dozois, 2021):

Our thoughts (cognitive activity) influence our behavior.
We can observe and adjust our thought patterns.
Changing how we think can lead to desired behavioral changes.
While many very different interventions are built upon these foundational principles, they all share the idea that “cognition influences how an individual feels and behaves, and that cognition can be altered to mediate behavior change” (Dobson & Dozois, 2021, p. 6).


Many of the CBT tools and exercises that are effective in therapy can also be helpful in everyday life.

The nine techniques and tools listed below are some of the most common and powerful CBT practices.


Cognitive distortions
Many of the most popular and effective cognitive-behavioral therapy techniques are applied to what psychologists call cognitive distortions: “systematic information processing biases that distort incoming information to fit the pre‐existing schema” (Puri et al., 2021, p. 1974).

Inaccurate thoughts reinforce our negative thinking patterns and emotions in various forms, several of which are captured in the following infographic (Pittard et al., 2020).


Some of the tools and techniques found in cognitive behavioral therapy are intended to address or reverse cognitive distortions, such as catastrophizing, overgeneralization, and jumping to conclusions (Pittard et al., 2020).

The following CBT exercises can help restore the balance between reality and our inner mental landscape:

Decatastrophizing
Identify the harmful and excessive worry associated with a problem or situation and focus on what will most likely happen.
Decatastrophizing Worksheet
Examine a potential catastrophe causing you to become overwhelmed and capture the most reassuring or positive thing you would like to hear.
Cataloging Your Inner Rules
Create a list of unhelpful or judgmental rules that impact you daily, then challenge and replace each one.
WDEP Questions Worksheet
Build more clarity surrounding your inner thoughts by understanding what you want, what you are doing, and what your plan is.
Disputing Irrational Beliefs
Recognize and challenge irrational beliefs by asking if they’re working for you.
Dysfunctional Thought Record
Record and analyze negative thoughts in this seven-column worksheet to help identify cognitive distortions.
Challenging Catastrophic Thinking Worksheet
Capture thought processes associated with catastrophic thinking to encourage a more balanced perspective.
Our article Cognitive Distortions: 22 Examples & Worksheets (& PDF) digs deeper into our tendency to make inaccurate connections from overly simplistic assumptions and offers CBT exercises and techniques to help.

3 Instantly calming CBT techniques for anxiety
Mark Tyrrell explores CBT’s value and limitations and three powerful approaches for gaining control over our thinking.

3 Instantly Calming CBT Techniques For Anxiety
Cognitive distortions: Cognitive behavioral therapy techniques
This video shows how our mind can mislead us and shares steps to manage unhelpful thoughts that contribute to depression and mental illness.

Cognitive Distortions: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Techniques 18/30
7 Best CBT Techniques for Therapists
Recent and ongoing research confirms the value of CBT, behavioral therapy, and cognitive therapy for treating anxiety and mood disorders such as depression, and is often considered the treatment of choice (Yarwood et al., 2024; Dobson & Dozois, 2021).

Several CBT exercises are included below:

For anxiety
Graded Exposure Worksheet
Understand your fears by rating them and reducing them incrementally through graded exposure.
Progressive Muscle Relaxation – Early Basics
Use progressive muscle relaxation to relax the physical tension and tightness we feel as part of our stress response. This version is particularly suited to younger clients.
The Downward Arrow Core Beliefs
Negative beliefs increase our anxiety. Identify which situations bring up negative emotions, what thoughts accompany them, and what they mean to you.
For depression
Activity Schedule
Depression can make planning and performing even the simplest tasks challenging. Create a schedule to establish a baseline of meaningful and enjoyable tasks and activities and build in new ones.
Behavior Contract
Create a contract with trusted and supportive friends, colleagues, and family members that commits to healthy behaviors and limits unhealthy ones.
Recognizing Rumination
Persistent negative thinking is a key risk factor for depression (Yarwood et al., 2024). Identify recurring unhelpful thoughts and when they happen to change the narrative.
Challenging Unhelpful Thoughts Arising from Grief Worksheet
Working through grief can be overwhelming and, if not dealt with, lead to longer-term mood disorders. Help clients replace destructive thoughts with more constructive alternatives.
Cognitive behavioral therapy exercises (FEEL Better!)
Barbara Heffernan’s valuable video provides an excellent starting point for understanding key activities for overcoming anxiety and depression.

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Exercises (FEEL Better!)
9 Powerful CBT Exercises & Interventions
CBT-inspired exercises and techniques can be valid in many different contexts and various populations, including supporting those with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), phobias, and anger management issues (Pan et al., 2019; Dobson & Dozois, 2021; MacMahon et al., 2015).

The following CBT exercises may have more than one use:

For ADHD
If–Then Planning
Create plans for managing challenging situations and taking control of the unexpected.
Problem-Solving Self-Monitoring Form
Use problem-solving to tackle challenges, plan and prioritize tasks, and meet deadlines.
Getting the Facts Worksheet
Practice differentiating between assumptions and facts when making decisions.
CBT exposure exercises
Imagery-Based Exposure Worksheet
Practice recalling difficult memories and accepting them to reduce avoidance behaviors.
Interoceptive Exposure
Expose yourself to panic-related physiological symptoms and thoughts and learn how to become more comfortable with them.
Event Visualization Worksheet
Use visualization as a flexible, safe, and controlled environment to explore future challenges or situations that heighten fears.
For anger management
Anger Exit and Re-Entry Routines: The Pause That Refreshes
Understand the thoughts and signals that warn when you are about to lose control of your anger.
Evaluating Your Thoughts, Thought Diary Worksheet
Identify and understand thoughts leading to overly emotional responses and consider how else a situation might be interpreted.
Pleasant Activity Scheduling Worksheet
Schedule enjoyable activities to help manage extreme emotions and provide a sense of mastery over situations and events.
5 Free Tools
Download 5 Free Positive Psychology Tools
Start thriving today with 5 free tools grounded in the science of positive psychology.

6 Evidence-Based CBT Worksheets
CBT’s cognitive restructuring is one of the most vital techniques for behavioral and cognitive transformation (Dobson & Dozois, 2021).

Cognitive restructuring
Once you identify the distortions you hold, you can explore how they took root and why you came to believe them. When you discover a destructive or harmful belief, you can begin challenging it — known as cognitive restructuring (Dobson & Dozois, 2021).

CBT exercises that directly or indirectly support cognitive restructuring include:

Thought Record Worksheet
Identify faulty thinking styles, such as self-blame and rigid thinking.
Behavioral Experiments to Test Beliefs Worksheet
Test negative thoughts to reevaluate underlying beliefs and assumptions.
Cognitive Restructuring of an Event
Reflect on how each negative situation can be reframed more positively or accepted for what it is and the positives it may offer.
Cognitive Restructuring Worksheet
Use Socratic questioning to challenge whether irrational thoughts are based on evidence or opinion.
ABC Functional Analysis Worksheet
Explore the antecedents of behavior to understand whether they are unhelpful and inaccurate.
Replacing “What If” Statements Worksheet
Reduce anxiety by identifying distorted thinking and replacing it with more helpful thought patterns.
6 More Cognitive Behavioral Activities for Your Clients
Problem SolvingCBT has evolved over the years to meet the needs of various groups and support multiple issues. However, despite their broad applicability, CBT interventions typically fit into one or more of the following (Dobson & Dozois, 2021):

Cognitive restructuring
Coping skills
Problem-solving
The following CBT exercises are helpful as standalone activities and in conjunction with other therapeutic approaches and expand on coping and problem-solving:

Coping Styles Formulation Worksheet
Help clients and therapists reach a shared understanding of the presenting problem and develop more adaptive coping strategies.
Coping With Stress
Identify the life situations that leave you stressed and find more adaptive, helpful coping mechanisms.
I Will Survive
Focus on past events to understand personal coping skills and support systems that can help future challenges.
Reverse the Rabbit Hole Worksheet
Problem-solving with positive outcomes rather than focusing on what can go wrong can help manage and avoid worry and anxiety.
Problem-Solving Worksheet for Adults
Clearly describing problems, weighing their potential consequences, and capturing possible solutions is a powerful approach for managing and controlling unhelpful thinking.
Core Beliefs Suitcases Worksheet
Understanding core beliefs supports coping and problem-solving in existing and new situations.
In recent years, CBT has increasingly been combined with multiple aspects of positive psychology. The following infographic compares and contrasts the two approaches (Vazquez et al., 2018):

The Difference between Traditional and Positive CBT
How is positive cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) different from traditional CBT?

Although both forms of CBT have the same goal of bringing about positive changes in a client’s life, the pathways used in traditional and positive CBT to actualize this goal differ considerably. Traditional CBT, as initially formulated by Beck (1967), focuses primarily on the following:

Analyzing problems
Lessening what causes suffering
Working on clients’ weaknesses
Getting away from problems
Instead, positive CBT, as formulated by Bannink (2012), focuses mainly on the following:

Finding solutions
Enhancing what causes flourishing
Working with client’s strengths
Getting closer to the preferred future
In other words, Positive CBT shifts the focus on what’s right with the person (rather than what’s wrong with them) and on what’s working (rather than what’s not working) to foster a more optimistic process that empowers clients to flourish and thrive.

In an initial study comparing the effects of traditional and Positive CBT in the treatment of depression, positive CBT resulted in a more substantial reduction of depression symptoms, a more significant increase in happiness, and it was associated with less dropout (Geschwind et al., 2019).


6 Common Challenges & Tips to Overcome Them
As with all therapy, CBT has its challenges.

Building a solid therapeutic alliance
A strong therapeutic alliance is vital to successful client outcomes and overcoming challenges such as (Ardito & Rabellino, 2011; DeAngelis, 2019):

Clients who do not wish to engage in therapy, either because they lack motivation or trust
Barriers to communication that prevent a collaborative relationship
Tips

Patiently build a solid alliance based on transparency, clarity, and trust.
Share the rationale behind interventions to increase client understanding and confidence.
Work together to identify therapeutic objectives, fostering an open partnership.
Obtain and act upon feedback from the client.
Overcoming resistance
Clients aren’t always ready for the therapeutic process and may display signs of resistance, for example (Clay, 2017; Dobson & Dozois, 2021):

They may be unwilling to open up during sessions.
Communication may be abrupt or argumentative.
Clients may not complete homework assignments.
Tips

Spend time building rapport and trust.
Engage in active listening and display empathy.
Openly discuss any fears or concerns the client may have.
Repair any ruptures or breakdowns in the alliance.
Tailoring exercises to fit clients’ needs
CBT exercises and tools must be specific to the situation and the client to maximize their effectiveness. Otherwise, clients may struggle to change unhelpful thoughts and beliefs (Dobson & Dozois, 2021).

Tips

Tailor interventions and CBT exercises to the clients’ needs and make them appropriate to their situation.
Listen to what the clients say and remain flexible with the techniques adopted.
Educate and involve the clients in the therapy process, explaining the purpose of each activity.

World’s Largest Positive Psychology Resource
The Positive Psychology Toolkit© is a groundbreaking practitioner resource containing over 500 science-based exercises, activities, interventions, questionnaires, and assessments created by experts using the latest positive psychology research.

Updated monthly. 100% science-based.

“The best positive psychology resource out there!”
— Emiliya Zhivotovskaya, Flourishing Center CEO

Helpful Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Manuals & Workbooks
There are many manuals and workbooks that help therapists apply cognitive behavioral therapy exercises in their work. The following are three of our favorites of the most popular resources available:

1. Handbook of Cognitive Behavioral Therapies – Keith Dobson and David Dozois (Editors)
Handbook of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies

This is a vital resource for students and mental health practitioners wishing to understand CBT, adopt its key principles, and introduce related interventions to therapy sessions.

The editors have collated essential chapters that explain CBT alongside related therapies and how to apply them to specific populations.

Find the book on Amazon.

2. The Comprehensive Clinician’s Guide to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy – Leslie Sokol and Marci Fox
The Comprehensive Clinician’s Guide to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy

This vast knowledge base captured in a spiral-bound form provides comprehensive and up-to-date information on CBT and its exercises.

The authors have packed the manual with worksheets, plans, and exercises covering various issues, including anger management, post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, and psychosis.

Find the book on Amazon.

3. The CBT Toolbox – Jeff Riggenbach
The CBT Toolbox

In this book, Jeff Riggenbach turns his 20 years of clinical practice into a valuable collection of 185 CBT-based tools.

This practical book offers a vital resource for counselors and therapists helping clients address unhelpful thinking patterns.

Find the book on Amazon.

 

For other resources, see our article 12+ Best CBT Books to Master Cognitive Behavioral Therapy.

17 Positive CBT and Cognitive Therapy Tools
17 Science-Based Ways To Apply Positive CBT
These 17 Positive CBT & Cognitive Therapy Exercises [PDF] include our top-rated, ready-made templates for helping others develop more helpful thoughts and behaviors in response to challenges, while broadening the scope of traditional CBT.

Created by Experts. 100% Science-based.

Resources From PositivePsychology.com
We have many CBT exercises available for therapists wishing to support individuals and groups facing emotional and behavioral challenges. You can make a start with our dedicated article exploring our favorite CBT techniques and worksheets.

More extensive versions of the following tools are available with a paid subscription to the Positive Psychology Toolkit©, but they are described briefly below.

Behavioral Activation
Behavioral activation offers an effective technique for decreasing depressive symptoms by encouraging clients to embrace activities that provide them with experiences of pleasure or a sense of mastery. Try out the following four steps:
Step one – Log existing activity levels.
Step two – Categorize each one as energy giving or draining.
Step three – Identify which activities offer pleasure or a sense of mastery.
Step four – Find opportunities to engage in more energy-giving activities throughout the week.
Daily Exceptions Journal
This exercise combines traditional CBT with positive psychology by encouraging clients to focus on what is right, rather than wrong, in their lives.
The technique enables the client and therapist to better understand the problems the client faces and the contexts in which they occur.

Complete a daily exceptions journal by answering a series of questions, including:

What has improved today, even if just a little bit?
What did I do differently to improve things?
When didn’t I experience the problem today?
When was the problem less of a problem?
What could I continue to do to make improvements?

If you’re looking for more science-based ways to help others through CBT, this collection contains 17 validated positive CBT tools for practitioners. Use them to help others overcome unhelpful thoughts and feelings and develop more positive behaviors.

A Take-Home Message
Therapists, clients, and researchers confirm the value of CBT for supporting individuals, couples, and families wishing to move away from unhelpful or even harmful feelings and behaviors.

CBT is diverse and evolving. It represents a convergence of behavioral strategies and cognitive processes continually integrating insights from neuroscience, positive psychology, and mindfulness-based interventions to enhance its effectiveness and adaptability.

The ongoing transformation enables CBT to address various mental health challenges while working alongside and complementing other therapeutic approaches (Dobson & Dozois, 2021).

Such versatility and broad applicability mean it is highly valued in various populations, including those facing depression, mood disorders, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, eating disorders, and anxiety.

CBT exercises and techniques take many forms and have a range of purposes, including managing stress, replacing unhelpful thoughts, goal setting, boosting performance and self-esteem, and improving resilience (Riggenbach, 2021).

But like other therapies, it has its challenges. Ultimately, the therapeutic alliance is vital. The therapist and client must see the work as a partnership built on trust where open dialogue is essential.

Whether you are a trained cognitive behavioral therapist or other mental health practitioner, it is vital to understand the potentially damaging impact of clients’ unhelpful thoughts. Once recognized, it is possible to bridge theory and practice by designing practical CBT exercises that help clients overcome these unwanted thoughts and make meaningful life improvements.

We hope you enjoyed reading this article. For more information, don’t forget to download our five positive psychology tools for free.

ED: Rewrite Apr 2025

Frequently Asked Questions
What are the techniques for CBT?
What are some common examples of CBT exercises?
Can CBT exercises help with anxiety and depression?
References
Ardito, R. B., & Rabellino, D. (2011). Therapeutic alliance and outcome of Psychotherapy: Historical excursus, measurements, and prospects for research. Frontiers in Psychology, 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00270
Clay, R. A. (n.d.). Coping with challenging clients. APA Monitor on Psychology. Retrieved January 16, 2025, from https://www.apa.org/monitor/2017/07-08/challenging-clients
DeAngelis, T. (2019). Better relationships with patients lead to better outcomes. APA Monitor on Psychology, 50(10). Retrieved January 15, 2024, from https://www.apa.org/monitor/2019/11/ce-corner-relationships
Dobson, K. S., & Dozois, D. J. (2021). Handbook of cognitive-behavioral therapies. The Guilford Press.
Geschwind, N., Arntz, A., Bannink, F., & Peeters, F. (2019). Positive cognitive behavior therapy in the treatment of depression: A randomized order within-subject comparison with traditional cognitive behavior therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 116, 119–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2019.03.005
MacMahon, P., Stenfert Kroese, B., Jahoda, A., Stimpson, A., Rose, N., Rose, J., Townson, J., Hood, K., & Willner, P. (2015). “It’s made all of us bond since that course…” – a qualitative study of service users’ experiences of a CBT anger management group intervention. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 59(4), 342–352. https://doi.org/10.1111/jir.12144
Pan, M.-R., Huang, F., Zhao, M.-J., Wang, Y.-F., Wang, Y.-F., & Qian, Q.-J. (2019). A comparison of efficacy between cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and CBT combined with medication in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Psychiatry Research, 279, 23–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2019.06.040
Pittard, C. M. & Pössel, P. (2020). Cognitive distortions. In T.K. Shackelford & V. Zeigler-Hill (Eds.), Encyclopedia of personality and individual differences (pp. 706–708). Springer International Publishing.
Puri, P., Kumar, D., Muralidharan, K., & Kishore, M. T. (2021). Evaluating schema modes and cognitive distortions in borderline personality disorder: A mixed‐method approach. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 77(9), 1973–1984. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.23126
Riggenbach, J. (2021). The CBT toolbox, second edition: 185 tools to manage anxiety, depression, anger, behaviors and stress (2nd ed.). PESI.
Vazquez, C., Duque, A., Blanco, I., Pascual, T., Poyato, N., Lopez‐Gomez, I., & Chaves, C. (2018). CBT and positive psychology interventions for clinical depression promote healthy attentional biases: An eye‐tracking study. Depression and Anxiety, 35(10), 966–973. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22786
Werson, A. D., Meiser-Stedman, R., & Laidlaw, K. (2022). A meta-analysis of CBT efficacy for depression comparing adults and older adults. Journal of Affective Disorders, 319, 189–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2022.09.020
Yarwood, B., Taylor, R., & Angelakis, I. (2024). User experiences of CBT for anxiety and depression: A qualitative systematic review and meta-synthesis. Community Mental Health Journal, 60(4), 662–671. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10597-023-01196-w
About the author
Jeremy Sutton, Ph.D., is an experienced psychologist, coach, consultant, and psychology lecturer. He works with individuals and groups to promote resilience, mental toughness, strength-based coaching, emotional intelligence, wellbeing, and flourishing. Alongside teaching psychology at the University of Liverpool, he is an amateur endurance athlete who has completed numerous ultra-marathons and is an Ironman.
Jeremy Sutton
How useful was this article to you?
Not useful at all
Very useful
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Comments
What our readers think
Jala Javadova
Jala Javadova on November 9, 2025 at 22:13
I love it.

Reply
Pilar
Pilar on October 29, 2025 at 00:07
¡Estupendos aportes! Gracias por compartir este trabajo.

Reply
Let us know your thoughts
Your email address will not be published.

Write your comment here

Your name

Your email

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.


Blog articles
Related articles
Cognitive Reframing
Positive CBT
Cognitive Restructuring: The Power of Reframing Thoughts
20 Nov 2025
43
30 Nov 2025
Do your clients ever follow a certain train of thought, without consciously deciding to, that leads them to a sad or upsetting conclusion? If so, [...]

REBT
Positive CBT
What Is Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy? (+ REBT PDF)
1 Sep 2025
74
12 Sep 2025
How rational do you think we humans are? This may seem like an abstract and philosophical question, but the way you answer it has a [...]

Positive CBT
Positive CBT
What Is Positive CBT? Using Positive Psychology in Therapy
14 Apr 2025
5
30 Nov 2025
Many people are familiar with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and know that it is an effective form of talk therapy. CBT integrates cognitive restructuring and [...]

Categories
Read other articles by their category
Body & Brain (61)
Boundaries (9)
Coaching & Application (38)
Compassion (23)
Counseling (40)
Emotional Intelligence (22)
Gratitude (18)
Grief & Bereavement (18)
Happiness & SWB (40)
Meaning & Values (27)
Meditation (16)
Mindfulness (39)
Motivation & Goals (41)
Optimism & Mindset (33)
Positive CBT (28)
Positive Communication (24)
Positive Education (39)
Positive Emotions (32)
Positive Leadership (17)
Positive Parenting (14)
Positive Psychology (20)
Positive Workplace (37)
Productivity (16)
Relationships (44)
Resilience & Coping (39)
Self Awareness (21)
Self Esteem (35)
Strengths & Virtues (31)
Stress & Burnout Prevention (37)
Theory & Books (43)
Therapy Exercises (37)
Types of Therapy (56)
TrustPilot

Rated 4.7 based on 205+ reviews
Quick Links

Store
Blog
About
Contact
Our Community

Practitioner Case Studies
Reviews & Testimonials
Join the team
Continuing Education Opportunities
Become an Affiliate
Team
Company details

Chamber of Commerce (KvK) Registration Number: 64733564

Taxation (VAT) Number: NL855806813B01

Contact

PositivePsychology.com

Basisweg 10

1043 AP Amsterdam

The Netherlands

info@positivepsychology.com

Sign up and download tools

Join 550,000+ helping professionals who get free, science-based tools sent directly to their inbox. Plus, be the first to receive exclusive content & discounts.

Your first name
Email Address

Supporting...
© 2025 PositivePsychology.com B.V., a division of Intelvio LLC

Disclaimer Terms and Conditions Refund Policy Privacy Policy
Download Free Tools


Locations:
Abu DhabiCanadaFloridaLondonNevadaOhio
Gray gradientGray gradient
855.733.3712MyChartNeed Help?CareersDonate Now
Gray gradientGray gradient
Cleveland Clinic logo
Find a Provider
Locations and Directions
Institutes and Departments
Patients and Visitors
Health Library
Search
Home/Health Library/Medical Treatments/Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT)
Advertisement

Advertisement
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT)
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is a type of talk therapy for people who experience emotions very intensely. It’s a common therapy for people with borderline personality disorder, but therapists provide it for other mental health conditions as well.

Advertisement


Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy

Care at Cleveland Clinic
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment
Advertisement


Advertisement


Advertisement


Advertisement


Contents
Overview
Treatment Details
Risks / Benefits
Recovery and Outlook
When To Call the Doctor
Overview
What is dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)?
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is a type of talk therapy (psychotherapy). It’s based on cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), but it’s specially adapted for people who experience emotions very intensely.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of talk therapy that helps people understand how thoughts affect emotions and behaviors.

“Dialectical” means combining opposite ideas. DBT focuses on helping people accept the reality of their lives and their behaviors, as well as helping them learn to change their lives, including their unhelpful behaviors.

Dialectical behavior therapy was developed in the 1970s by Marsha Linehan, an American psychologist.

What is dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) used for?
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is especially effective for people who have difficulty managing and regulating their emotions.

DBT has proven to be effective for treating and managing a wide range of mental health conditions, including:

Borderline personality disorder (BPD).
Self-harm.
Suicidal behavior.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Substance use disorder.
Eating disorders, specifically binge eating disorder and bulimia.
Depression.
Anxiety.
It’s important to note that the reason DBT has proved effective for treating these conditions is that each of these conditions is thought to be associated with issues that result from unhealthy or problematic efforts to control intense, negative emotions. Rather than depending on efforts that cause problems for the person, DBT helps people learn healthier ways to cope.

How do I find a DBT therapist?
A therapist can be a psychiatrist (a medical doctor who can prescribe medications), psychiatric nurse, psychologist, social worker or family therapist.

Finding the right therapist is often a time-consuming task, and DBT therapy isn’t any different. Try not to become discouraged. Talk to people you trust to give you a referral for a therapist who uses dialectical behavior therapy, whether it’s your primary healthcare provider or a friend or family member.

You can also search for therapists online through local and state psychological associations.

Be sure that any therapist you’re interested in seeing is a state-certified and licensed mental health professional and that they treat your area of concern (for example, eating disorders, borderline personality disorder, self-harm, etc.).

Most therapists’ websites list the conditions and problems they treat. If you have questions, call or email the therapist’s office before you choose.

It may be helpful to ask a potential DBT therapist the following questions:

What is the nature of your training in DBT?
Do you provide comprehensive DBT or a modification? If not comprehensive DBT, why not?
Do you belong to a DBT consultation team?
What’s your policy on phone calls and emails during the week?
How much time will you initially ask me to commit to for the entire therapy process?
Treatment Details
How does dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) work?
The main goal of therapists who use dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is to strike a balance between validation (acceptance) of who you are and your challenges and the benefits of change. Your therapist will help you learn new skills to improve emotion regulation.

The structure of dialectical behavior therapy can vary some from therapist to therapist, but, in general, DBT involves these four types of sessions:

DBT pre-assessment.
Individual therapy.
Skills training in groups.
Telephone crisis coaching.
DBT pre-assessment
Your therapist may offer an assessment before starting DBT. They’ll determine how suitable DBT is for you by asking you questions and explaining how DBT works. If you decide that DBT is the right therapy for you, they’ll ask you to commit to the treatment and the length of treatment.

Individual DBT therapy
Individual DBT therapy involves weekly sessions with your therapist. Each session lasts about 40 minutes to 60 minutes.

Individual DBT therapy sessions have the following goals:

To help keep you safe by reducing suicidal and self-harming behaviors, if applicable.
To limit behaviors that get in the way of productive therapy.
To help you reach your goals and improve your quality of life by addressing what’s blocking your progress, such as mental health conditions or relationship issues.
To help you learn new skills to replace unhelpful behaviors.
Your therapist will likely ask you to keep a diary to track your emotions and actions and to look for patterns of behavior. You’ll bring this diary with you to your sessions so you and your therapist can decide what to work on for each session.

DBT skills training in groups
In these sessions, your therapist will teach you skills in a group setting. This isn’t to be confused with group therapy, in which you discuss your problems with others. Think of it more like a teaching and learning session in a classroom setting.

DBT skills aim to help enhance your capabilities in day-to-day life. The four skills your therapist will teach include:

Mindfulness: This is the practice of being fully aware and focused in the present instead of worrying about the past or future.
Distress tolerance: This involves understanding and managing your emotions in difficult or stressful situations without responding with harmful behaviors.
Interpersonal effectiveness: This means understanding how to ask for what you want and need and setting boundaries while maintaining respect for yourself and others.
Emotion regulation: This means understanding, being more aware of and having more control over your emotions.
Telephone crisis coaching
DBT often involves telephone crisis coaching to support you in your daily life. This means you can call your therapist at certain times for support between sessions.

Examples of when you may need to call your therapist include:

When you need help with an immediate crisis, such as wanting to self-harm.
When you’re trying to use the DBT skills you learned but want some advice on how to do it.
However, your therapist will set clear boundaries about when you can call them, such as during an agreed-upon range of time during the day.

Crisis coaching functions on an as-needed basis. The calls are usually brief, and they shouldn’t replace the work of individual or group sessions.

Risks / Benefits
What are the benefits and risks of dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)?
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) has been proven to help people with their mental health conditions in several studies. For people with borderline personality disorder, in particular, DBT results in:

Less self-harm behavior and anger.
Fewer days of inpatient hospitalization.
Less drug and alcohol misuse.
Improved depressive symptoms.
However, DBT isn’t for everyone, and it can be very difficult. DBT is more likely to work for you if you:

Are committed to making positive changes.
Are ready to fully commit to therapy and do homework assignments.
Are ready to focus mostly on your present and future, rather than your past.
Feel able to do some sessions in a group with others.
Recovery and Outlook
How long will I need dialectical behavior therapy?
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) usually takes at least six months to a year. However, each person is unique, and mental health conditions are complex. You shouldn’t expect to be completely free of symptoms or no longer have problematic behaviors after one year of DBT.

Many therapists believe that the treatment for borderline personality disorder, in particular, can often take several years.

Try not to get discouraged by how long it may take to be able to better manage your emotions and have a better quality of life. The important thing is that you’re seeking help. Any progress is good progress.

When To Call the Doctor
When should I see my healthcare provider or therapist while doing DBT?
It’s important to go to all of your scheduled individual DBT therapy sessions and group skill training sessions.

If you’re experiencing a crisis, such as feeling suicidal, and can call your therapist, do so.

If your therapist is unavailable, call the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at 988. Someone will be available to talk with you 24 hours a day, seven days a week. You can also call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is an effective treatment to help people who experience very intense, negative emotions. Although it may be difficult and time-consuming to find the right DBT therapist for you, it’s important to keep trying. The sooner you can start therapy — and stay committed to it — the sooner you’ll have an improved quality of life.

Care at Cleveland Clinic
Your mental well-being is just as important as your physical well-being. Cleveland Clinic’s mental health experts can help you live life to the fullest.

Caregiver speaking to patient.
Mental Health Care
Make an Appointment



Medically Reviewed
Last reviewed on 04/19/2022.

Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.

References
Advertisement

Advertisement
Appointments
866.588.2264
Find a Provider

Need a primary care doctor or a specialist? Our Find a Provider tool makes it easy to search Cleveland Clinic’s trusted network.

Locations

Find any of our 300+ locations.

Appointments

Get the in-person or virtual care you need.

Subscribe to Cleveland Clinic Health Essentials
Actions
Appointments & Access
Accepted Insurance
Events Calendar
Financial Assistance
Give to Cleveland Clinic
Pay Your Bill Online
Price Transparency
Refer a Patient
Phone Directory
Virtual Second Opinions
Virtual Visits
About Cleveland Clinic
100 Years of Cleveland Clinic
About Us
Locations
Quality & Patient Safety
Patient Experience
Research & Innovations
Community Commitment
Careers
For Employees
Resources for Medical Professionals
Follow Cleveland Clinic

Facebook icon
X icon
YouTube icon
Instagram icon
LinkedIn icon
Blog, News & Apps

ConsultQD
Health Essentials
Newsroom
MyClevelandClinic
MyChart
Site Information & Policies

Send Us Feedback
About this Website
Advertising Policy
Social Media Policy
Copyright, Reprint & Licensing
Website Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Non-Discrimination and Availability
Call: 800.223.2273 | 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | © 2025 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.
Transparent audience pixel

1.844.HOPEWAY
TikTok
YouTube
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Pinterest
Careers
Contact
Events
Donate

Who We Serve
Our Programs
How We Help
About Us
Resources
Admissions
 Back to All
What is DBT (Dialectical Behavior Therapy)?
August 14, 2025

Sheri Tiziani, LCMHCS, Primary Therapist 

DBT is a type of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy that was developed to help clients cope with, and change, unhealthy behaviors while focusing on four areas – mindfulness, distress tolerance, emotional regulation and interpersonal effectiveness. Dialectical Behavioral Therapy (DBT) is one of the therapeutic modalities used at HopeWay. Clients engage in DBT in both group therapy and individual therapy. One of the many benefits of this form of therapy is that it is comprehensive and skill based.

 

Using DBT Strategies to Improve Life Skills
It is natural for all humans to experience a range of emotions. Some may experience more intense emotions more often than others and everyone has ways, either healthy or unhealthy, to deal with their emotions. Many of the DBT skills are helpful to know and understand because it simply helps people enhance their life skills. Below you will find an overview of the four focus areas with applicable strategies.

Understanding The 4 Components of Dialectical Behavior Therapy
Mindfulness
Mindfulness is a DBT skill that can help people cope and feel more grounded when dealing with adverse situations. It means intentionally and non-judgmentally living with awareness in the present moment.

Distress Tolerance
Distress tolerance is the ability to survive crisis situations without making them worse. It helps with acceptance of reality and replaces suffering & being stuck with the possibility of moving forward. Finally, it can free an individual of having to satisfy the demands of their own desires, urges and intense emotions.

When an intense emotion arises, no matter if it is anger, sadness, anxiety, or any other emotion, distress tolerance can help bring the intensity down quickly so that the emotion doesn’t overwhelm your ability to reason and problem-solve.

First, rate your emotional intensity on a scale of 1-10, and if it’s at 6 or higher, it’s probably time for some distress tolerance to bring it down to 5 or below.

Emotion Regulation
Emotion Regulation helps to understand and acknowledge emotions, decrease the frequency of unwanted emotions, manage extreme emotions, reduce suffering when experiencing painful emotions and ultimately start to feel how you want to feel more often.

Interpersonal Effectiveness
Interpersonal Effectiveness is the ability to use assertiveness to meet personal objectives, navigate conflict, improve healthy relationships and build self-respect.

 

Helpful DBT Techniques
When practicing Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT), there are several effective techniques and skills that can support emotional regulation and mindfulness. Some of the most useful include the 5-4-3-2-1 grounding technique, the TIPP skill, the DEARMAN skill, and the Opposite Action technique.

5,4,3,2,1 Grounding Technique
Mindfulness with the 5 Senses, also referred to as “5,4,3,2,1”

Notice:

5 things you see
4 things you hear
3 things you feel
2 things you smell
1 thing you taste.
These can be done in any order you’d like. Take the opportunity to intentionally notice things you might not otherwise (if you are outside in nature, think warm sunshine, soft rain, birds singing, water flowing, flowers budding, fresh cut grass). Notice sensations as they rise and as they fall. Let your mind focus on each sensation as it arises. Notice each sensation with curiosity, allowing it to be. Examine the uniqueness of each sensation.

54321 grounding technique exercise

 

TIPP Skill
T - Temperature
Grab some ice or something cold like a cold soda can, and hold it in your hand or put it on your face or neck. Splashing cold water on your face may work as well.

I - Intense exercise
Engage in one minute of intense physical activity such as jumping jacks or pushups.   

P - Paced breathing
Breathe deeply into your belly and slow your pace of inhaling and exhaling way down (on average 5-6 breaths per minute).

P - Paired muscle relaxation
It is best to pair this with paced breathing. While breathing into your belly deeply tense your body muscles (not so much as to cause a cramp). Notice the tension in the body. While breathing out, say the word “relax” in your mind. Let go of the tension. Notice the difference in your body. This can be done with body muscles as a whole or one muscle group at a time.

Opposite Action
Every emotion has an action urge. Change the emotion by acting opposite to its action urge. For example, if you are feeling unmotivated or have low energy you may have a difficult time getting out of bed or completing a task. The action urge in this situation may be to remain in bed or inactive, and the opposite action is to get out of bed or engage in the task you are avoiding. The key is to engage into the opposite action as soon as you realize your action urge behavior (in this case inactivity/avoidance). While this is often easier in theory than in practice, if you can clear the initial hurdle of getting the ball rolling you will likely notice that you gain momentum and feel more motivated over time.

Another example includes applying the opposite action strategy to managing urges related to anger. When experiencing anger you may have an action urge to lash out or become aggressive toward someone. The opposite action is to gently avoid or, even more effective (albeit challenging), is to pay them a compliment. The idea is the opposite action will then induce an emotion, in the case dissipated anger. 

DEARMAN
(This skill can be especially helpful to navigate difficult conversations and practice assertiveness when communicating your wants & needs.)

D – Describe
Describe the current situation if necessary. Stick to the facts. “You told me you’d be home by dinner but you didn’t get here until 11.”

E – Express
Express your feelings and opinions about the situation. “When you come home so late, I start worrying about you”.

A – Assert
Assert yourself by asking for what you want or saying no clearly. “I would really appreciate if you would call me when you are going to be late.”

R – Reinforce
Reinforce (reward) the person ahead of time by explaining the positive effects of getting what you want or need“I would be so relieved, and a lot easier to live with, if you do that.”

M – (Stay) Mindful
Keep your focus on your goals. Don’t be distracted or get off topic even if the other person attempts to divert you. Just keep making your point, broken-record style if needed. “I would still like a call”

A – Appear
Appear effective and confident in your body language and voice tone.   

N – Negotiate
Offer and ask for other solutions to the problem and focus on what will work. “How about if you text me when you think you will be late?”

 

Learn About Hopeway's Programs
 

Editor's note: This blog post is presented for informational purposes only and is not meant to diagnose or treat any illness. If you have any health concern, see a licensed healthcare professional in person.
Hopeway Logo
info@hopeway.org
EIN: 46-4510365

TikTok Icon
YouTube Icon
LinkedIn Icon
Instagram Icon
Facebook Icon
Pinterest Icon
Who We Serve
Our Programs
How We Help
About Us
Resources
Admissions
LGBTQ
We strive to foster a safe, inclusive, and respectful environment for the LGBTQ+ community.


Charity Navigator Four-Star Rating
Joint Commission Seal
Behavioral Health Home Certification

Behavioral Health Care Accreditation

American Residential Treatment Association
Contact Events Donate
MRF Transparency
Copyright © 2025 HopeWay Foundation is a 501(c)3 organization. All rights reserved.

Crafted By

We Value Your Privacy
We use third-party cookies to enhance your browsing experience and to gain valuable insights to continually improve our website experience. We value privacy and end-user experience. By accepting cookies, you consent to our use of cookies.

Accept all
Manage Individual preferences


PTSD UK - Cookie Consent
We use browser cookies that help our website work and give us insights into how we can make it better.  You can read full details and change your preferences in our privacy policy.
Accept Cookies
Edit Preferences
Cookie Policy
Privacy
Back Home
Search
Home » Blog » Blog and News » Grounding Techniques for PTSD & C-PTSD
Grounding Techniques for PTSD & C-PTSD
‘Grounding’ is a practice that can help you pull away from flashbacks, unwanted memories, and negative or challenging emotions. These techniques may help distract you from what you’re experiencing and refocus on what’s happening in the present moment.
For many people with PTSD, or C-PTSD, they ‘forget’ to, or simply cannot, practise complex techniques when they are in the midst of a flashback, intrusive memory or panic attack (the experiences are too strong and distracting), but we have compiled a list of tips that people with these conditions have found useful in these situations.
 
We always feel a lived experience, and real examples from people with PTSD or C-PTSD are far more useful that general techniques – and although everyone’s experience of the condition is different, we hope that some of the tips shared here by our supporters, can help ‘bring you back’ and focus when you find it difficult.
 
I name everything I can see as fast as I can, I try to picture the words in my mind
If I’m listening to music I try to picture the lyrics as words in my mind
I started writing down words of feelings and emotions or unwanted thoughts. You can keep it or burn or screw it up and throw away
I use art for my PTSD and I have found that having lots of art supplies around me at home and being able to touch paint brushes etc really helps me when i am triggered
Running cold water over my wrists (easy to do at work and other peoples houses)
I listen to the ticking of my watch, and try to shut out everything except the ticking, I also use the ticking to control my breathing
Stamping my feet and I twiddle my thumbs
I also use 1 to 5 breathing. Breathe in for 1, breathe out for 1, breathe in for 2, breathe out for 2 and so on till 5 or 6, taking in as much oxygen as I can
If I’m alone, which I frequently am, I hold my own hand and try to imagine I’m not alone. It stops me from digging my nails into my hands
Say ‘I am safe’, take a deep breath, relax my muscles from scalp to toes. Repeat
If I’m with a person or talking on the phone I describe the room or place I’m in with lots of sensory details
Smelling essential oils works best for me initially when I’m dissociating.
I tell myself ‘that was then, this is now, it did happen but it will not anymore’
I sit outside and listen to birds and trees blowing and if its raining its even better and deep breaths, it calms me down
I have recently used my feet, I curl them up tight and then stretch them out I use it in conjunction with others or sometimes alone it helps me focus in my feet and not my body
I take myself off in my imagination to a forest. I sit on the grass under a tree and look up and focus on the sunlight I can see through the leaves. The more I focus on the different greens of the leaves, the smell of the grass under me and the sound of the birds and light wind through the trees, the calmer I feel
Easy distractions of calm things like looking at the horizon. Gaze at the clouds and stars
Basic house chores. Clean something to shiny goodness
I collect crystals, holding them while I take deep breaths helps bring me back
Talking to myself… I’m forever doing it
For me is praying
Walking barefoot on grass and noticing the sensations
Smells: I began to carry an orange in my pocket, digging my nails into it, the sharp smells and tactile nature of it, started to associate the smell with an alert to breathe
Spelling words out loud or counting back in sevens
Voice recordings of a person who makes me feel safe
Looking around me and spotting a ‘thing’ for every letter of the alphabet
Stand up, close my eyes and stand on one leg for 30 seconds and to then do it again on the other leg: it triggers the logical part of your brain
I tap or press between my nose and top lip
I smell my dogs neck and ears if I’m at home. Or ask for a very long, very tight hug from my husband (a hug from anyone else like that wouldn’t work in that moment as he’s the only person I trust implicitly.
Saying I’m safe over and over
I do times tables in my head when I’m feeling a panic attack coming on in public
If at home I tend to put headphones on and listen to shamanic drumming. It’s not for everyone but it works for me as it’s got a very grounding rhythm
Talking myself down, telling myself I’m safe, it’s okay, I’m in the present; look around the room, noting it’s my house, noting the date, noting I am alone, reiterating I am safe
I find the 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 thing really good: 5 things you can see, 4 you can touch, 3 you can hear, 2 you can smell, 1 you can taste. They’re quite flexible so you can swap them around if you’re somewhere noisy or it’s dark at night, or you’re eating
I lift weights, simple bicep curls with dumbbells. I just have them lying about so I can immediately channel it into something else
I have tried just eating or drinking something that is attached to recent nice memory to remind me of the ‘me’ now
I draw circles on the palm of my left hand with my right hand fingers and try to focus on breathing in and out and how that feels. I find this that I can do this anywhere any time, it doesn’t matter if I’m not home
Another thing I do is keep a hair band that feels quite rough to the touch near my exercise area (as I was feeling I needed something after exercising and during stretching / meditating). It’s horrible as a hair band as it pulls so much but that’s what makes it great for grounding when I touch it. I’ve not needed it for a while but it’s there just in case which is reassuring in itself
Touching something soft, smelling something nice, focus on something pretty that’s around me like flowers etc. (Try to keep things in my pocket incase there’s nothing around)
I carry a small pouch of lavender cuttings. The smell drags me out of what ever I’m feeling and puts me back into an English garden
I found a picture where I was truly happy and relaxed, I carried it round with me to start with, eventually the memory was so strong I didn’t need it to physically look at. When I was in a state I would think about how I felt at the time of the happy picture, remember the smells, sounds, people there, colours etc and it always helped
I use a portable flashing colour changing LED bulb pull light , I have one in my living room and two by my bath as I struggle with bathing , the light makes moving reflections which I stare into
Fingers and toes. I focus on my toes and feet, feeling the surface underneath. If I’m sitting, my fingertips feel the chair or sofa I’m on, concentrating on the space I’m in, here and now. My mantra is ‘now and here’ ‘here and now’ I repeat it mentally to bring me back out
Splashing cold water on your face or sucking on an ice cube
I have a favourite place I visit back in my head. I take myself off to that small bar on the beach in Lanzarote and look out to sea at Fuerteventura in the distance and I can smell the sea, hears the waves and the warmth of the sun on my face and I just drift off
I shake myself off. it looks really weird when I’m out but it’s almost like shaking myself out of it and back to the present
I use my cats for help. I get them to purr and the sound of that calms me.
Also smoothing their fur is calming too
Cold water on the back of the neck and hands, and forehead. Or just water in the face sometimes works
 
It’s important to note, that while choosing your PTSD recovery path you need to address both the symptoms and the underlying condition. NICE guidance updated in 2018 recommends the use of trauma focused psychological treatments for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder in adults, specifically the use of Eye Movement Desensitisation Reprocessing (EMDR) and trauma focused cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).

Please remember, these aren’t meant to be medical recommendations, but they’re tactics that have worked for others and might work for you, too. Be sure to work with a professional to find the best methods for you.

 
 

Image
Share
 
Share
 
Share
 
Send
Hello! Did you find this information useful?
Please consider supporting PTSD UK with a donation to enable us to provide more information & resources to help us to support everyone affected by PTSD, no matter the trauma that caused it
Donate now and support PTSD UK
PTSD UK Blog
You’ll find up-to-date news, research and information here along with some great tips to ease your PTSD in our blog.


Space Mission
PTSD UK’s Space Mission: Release. Reduce. Make Space. A gentle, virtual programme inviting you to take 20 purposeful actions this January to create space, support your mental health, and stand alongside others affected by PTSD and C-PTSD. Sign up to PTSD

Read More »

TMIscholarship
PTSD UK Yoga Therapy for PTSD Scholarship Returns for Its Fourth Year – Applications Now Open! We are absolutely delighted to announce that, for the fourth year running, PTSD UK is partnering with The Minded Institute to offer two fully

Read More »

Eating Disorder Support
Understanding and Supporting Loved Ones with Eating Disorders During the Festive Season It’s estimated that at least 52% of people with an eating disorder diagnosis have a history of trauma and supporting someone who is struggling with food is not

Read More »

Dealing with PTSD over the holidays
Dealing with PTSD over the holidays Post Traumatic Stress Disorder can cause a whole host of symptoms, which can affect every area of your life, and when this is paired with ‘expectations’ of how you should feel, it can become

Read More »

Navigating PTSD While Building a Business
Guest Post: Navigating PTSD While Building a Business At PTSD UK, we’re always honoured to share the stories of people who are using their experiences of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Complex PTSD (C-PTSD) to create something positive —

Read More »

PTSD UK Fireworks Impact Report 2025
PTSD UK Launches the Fireworks Impact Report 2025: Working Together for Change We’re incredibly proud to share the release of our Fireworks Impact Report 2025 — a first-of-its-kind study exploring how fireworks affect people living with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder

Read More »
« Previous articles Page1 Page2 Page3 Page4 Page5 Page6 Page7 Page8 Page9 Page10 Next articles »
Treatments for PTSD
It is possible for PTSD to be successfully treated many years after the traumatic event occurred, which means it is never too late to seek help. For some, the first step may be watchful waiting, then exploring therapeutic options such as individual or group therapy – but the main treatment options in the UK are psychological treatments such as Eye Movement Desensitisation Reprogramming (EMDR) and Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT).

Traumatic events can be very difficult to come to terms with, but confronting and understanding your feelings and seeking professional help is often the only way of effectively treating PTSD. You can find out more in the links below, or here.

Find out more about EMDR
Find out more about CBT

PTSD UK is a Registered Charity SCIO SC045995 regulated by the OSCR.

Registered Address (mail only): PTSD UK, 83 Princes Street, Edinburgh, EH2 2ER

 

Useful links
Legal Information and Policies
Donate to PTSD UK
Newsletter Signup
Founding Friends
Guest Blog Post Guidelines
Looking for something on the site?
Search

© 2025 PTSD UK – All rights reserved

 
 
 
Health Conditions
Wellness
Tools
Featured
Connect


Subscribe
Anxiety and Depression
Anxiety Treatment
Depression Treatment
Crisis Support
Navigating Therapy
Symptoms
Better Sleep
Nutrition & Supplements
Relationships
Emotional Well-Being
Physical Activity & Exercises
Resources for Doctors' Visits
Comorbidities

More in Anxiety

Causes & Risk Factors
Complications
Diagnosis
Diet
Home Remedies
Management
Prognosis
Related Conditions
Symptoms
Treatment
Types



30 Grounding Techniques to Quiet Distressing Thoughts

Physical techniques
Mental techniques
Soothing techniques
How do they work?
Bonus tips
FAQ
Key Takeaways
Grounding exercises help you refocus on the present to relieve feelings of anxiety, stress, depression, or PTSD.
Physical grounding techniques use your five senses to help you move through distress by focusing on tangible objects and sensations. For example, holding an ice cube or tasting something spicy.
Mental grounding techniques distract you from distressing feelings by redirecting your thoughts back to the present through memory games, categories, or reciting something
Grounding techniques are exercises that may help you refocus on the present moment to distract yourself from anxious feelings.

You can use grounding techniques to help create space from distressing feelings in nearly any situation, but they’re especially helpful for improving:

anxiety
well-being
stress
depression
mood
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
dissociation
Physical grounding techniques
These techniques use your five senses or tangible objects — things you can touch — to help you move through distress.

1. Put your hands in water
Focus on the water’s temperature and how it feels on your fingertips, palms, and the backs of your hands. Does it feel the same in each part of your hand?

Use warm water first, then cold. Next, try cold water first, then warm. Does it feel different to switch from cold to warm water versus warm to cold?

2. Pick up or touch items near you
Are the things you touch soft or hard? Heavy or light? Warm or cool? Focus on the texture and color of each item. Challenge yourself to think of specific colors, such as crimson, burgundy, indigo, or turquoise, instead of simply red or blue.

3. Breathe deeply
Slowly inhale, then exhale. If it helps, you can say or think “in” and “out” with each breath. Feel each breath filling your lungs and note how it feels to push it back out.

4. Savor a food or drink
Take small bites or sips of a food or beverage you enjoy, letting yourself fully taste each bite. Think about how it tastes and smells and the flavors that linger on your tongue.

5. Take a short walk
Concentrate on your steps — you can even count them. Notice the rhythm of your footsteps and how it feels to put your foot on the ground and then lift it again.

6. Hold a piece of ice
What does it feel like at first? How long does it take to start melting? How does the sensation change when the ice begins to melt?

7. Savor a scent
Is there a fragrance that appeals to you? This might be a cup of tea, an herb or spice, a favorite soap, or a scented candle. Inhale the fragrance slowly and deeply and try to note its qualities (sweet, spicy, citrusy, and so on).

8. Move your body
Do a few exercises or stretches. You could try:

jumping jacks
jumping up and down
jumping rope
jogging in place
stretching different muscle groups one by one
Pay attention to how your body feels with each movement and when your hands or feet touch the floor or move through the air.

How does the floor feel against your feet and hands? If you jump rope, listen to the sound of the rope in the air and when it hits the ground.

9. Listen to your surroundings
Take a few moments to listen to the noises around you. Do you hear birds? Dogs barking? Machinery or traffic? If you hear people talking, what are they saying? Do you recognize the language?

Let the sounds wash over you and remind you where you are.

10. Feel your body
You can do this sitting or standing. Focus on how your body feels from head to toe, noticing each part. Consider:

your hair on your shoulders or forehead
the weight of your shirt on your shoulders
whether your arms feel loose or stiff at your sides
your heartbeat, and whether it’s rapid or steady
whether your stomach feels full or you feel hungry
whether your legs are crossed or your feet are resting on the floor
Curl your fingers and wiggle your toes. Are you barefoot or in shoes? How does the floor feel against your feet?

11. Try the 5-4-3-2-1 method
Working backward from 5, use your senses to list things you notice around you. For example, you might start by listing:

5 things you hear
4 things you see
3 things you can touch from where you’re sitting
2 things you can smell
1 thing you can taste
Make an effort to notice the little things you might not always pay attention to, such as the color of the flecks in the carpet or the hum of your computer.

Mental grounding techniques
These grounding exercises use mental distractions to help redirect your thoughts away from distressing feelings and back to the present.

12. Play a memory game
Look at a detailed photograph or picture (like a cityscape or other “busy” scene) for 5–10 seconds. Then, turn the photograph face-down and recreate the photograph in your mind in as much detail as possible. Or, you can mentally list all the things you remember from the picture.

13. Think in categories
Choose one or two broad categories, such as “musical instruments,” “ice cream flavors,” or “baseball teams.” Take a minute or so to mentally list as many things from each category as you can.

14. Use math and numbers
Even if you aren’t a math person, numbers may help center you.

Try:

running through a times table in your head
counting backward from 100
choosing a number and thinking of five ways you could make the number (6 + 11 = 17, 20 – 3 = 17, 8 × 2 + 1 = 17, etc.)
15. Recite something
Think of a poem, song, or book passage you know by heart. Recite it quietly to yourself or in your head.

If you say the words aloud, focus on the shape of each word on your lips and in your mouth. If you say the words in your head, visualize each word as you’d see it on a page.

16. Make yourself laugh
Make up a silly joke — the kind you’d find on a candy wrapper or popsicle stick.

You might also watch your favorite funny animal video, a clip from a comedian or TV show you enjoy, or anything else you know will make you laugh.

17. Use an anchoring statement
This might be something like, “I’m Full Name. I’m X years old. I live in City, State. Today is Friday, June 3. It’s 10:04 in the morning. I’m sitting at my desk at work. There’s no one else in the room.”

You can expand on the phrase by adding details until you feel calm, such as, “It’s raining lightly, but I can still see the sun. It’s my break time. I’m thirsty, so I’m going to make a cup of tea.”

18. Visualize a daily task you enjoy or don’t mind doing
If you like doing laundry, for example, think about how you’d put away a finished load.

“The clothes feel warm coming out of the dryer. They’re soft and a little stiff at the same time. They feel light in the basket, even though they spill over the top. I’m spreading them out over the bed so they won’t wrinkle. I’m folding the towels first, shaking them out before folding them into halves, then thirds,” and so on.

19. Describe a common task
Think of an activity you do often or can do very well, such as making coffee, locking up your office, or tuning a guitar. Go through the process step-by-step, as if you’re giving someone else instructions on how to do it.

20. Imagine yourself leaving the painful feelings behind
Visualize:

gathering the emotions, balling them up, and putting them into a box
walking, swimming, biking, or jogging away from painful feelings
your thoughts as a song or TV show you dislike, changing the channel or turning down the volume — they’re still there, but you don’t have to listen to them
21. Describe what’s around you
Spend a few minutes taking in your surroundings and noting what you see. Use all five senses to provide as much detail as possible.

“This bench is red, but the bench over there is green. It’s warm under my jeans since I’m in the sun. It feels rough, but there aren’t any splinters. The air smells like smoke. I hear kids laughing and dogs barking.”

Soothing grounding techniques
You can use these techniques to comfort yourself in times of emotional distress. These exercises can help promote good feelings that may help the negative feelings fade or seem less overwhelming.

22. Picture the voice or face of someone you love
If you feel upset or distressed, visualize someone positive in your life. Imagine their face or think of what their voice sounds like. Imagine them telling you that the moment is tough but that you’ll get through it.

23. Practice self-kindness
Repeat kind, compassionate phrases to yourself:

“You’re having a rough time, but you’ll make it through.”
“You’re strong, and you can move through this pain.”
“You’re trying hard, and you’re doing your best.”
Say it, either aloud or in your head, as many times as you need.

24. Sit with your pet
If you’re at home and have a pet, spend a few moments just sitting with them. If they’re of the furry variety, pet them, focusing on how their fur feels. Consider their markings or unique characteristics. If you have a smaller pet you can hold, concentrate on how they feel in your hand.

Not at home? Think of your favorite things about your pet or how they would comfort you if they were there.

25. List favorites
List three favorite things in several different categories, such as:

foods
trees
songs
movies
books
places
26. Visualize your favorite place
Think of your favorite place, whether it’s the home of a loved one or a foreign country. Using each of your senses, imagine the noises you hear, the objects you see, and the scents you smell.

Try to recall the last time you went there. Think about what you did there and how it felt at the time.

27. Plan an activity
This might be something you do alone or with a friend or loved one. Think of what you’ll do and when. Maybe you’ll go to dinner, take a walk on the beach, see a movie you’ve been looking forward to, or visit a museum.

Focus on the details, such as what you’ll wear, when you’ll go, and how you’ll get there.

28. Touch something comforting
This could be your favorite blanket, a much-loved T-shirt, a smooth stone, or anything that feels good to touch. Think about how it feels under your fingers or in your hand.

If you have a favorite sweater, scarf, or pair of socks, put them on and spend a moment thinking about the sensation of the fabric on your skin.

29. List positive things
Write or mentally list four or five things in your life that bring you joy, visualizing each briefly.

30. Listen to music
Put on your favorite song, but pretend you’re listening to it for the first time. Focus on the melody and lyrics (if there are any).

Does the song give you chills or create any other physical sensations? Pay attention to the parts that stand out most.

How do grounding techniques work?
While there’s little research explaining how grounding techniques work, the techniques represent a common strategy for managing PTSD and anxiety.

Grounding techniques use tools such as visualization and senses, including sight, hearing, and smell, to help distract you from a variety of possible feelings and thoughts. Like mindfulness techniques, they help you return to the present moment.

During a panic attack or traumatic flashback, your emotions can take over your thoughts and physical responses. Focusing on the present through grounding techniques can help interrupt your body’s response and return your brain and feelings to a place of safety.

Additional tips
Grounding yourself isn’t always easy. It may take some time to find the techniques that work best for you in different situations.

Here are some additional tips to help you get the most out of these techniques:

Practice: It can help to practice grounding even when you aren’t dissociating or experiencing distress. If you get used to an exercise before you need to use it, it may take less effort when you want to use it to cope in the moment.
Avoid assigning values: For example, if you’re grounding yourself by describing your environment, concentrate on the basics of your surroundings rather than how you feel about them.
Check in with yourself: Before and after a grounding exercise, rate your distress as a number between 1 and 10. What level is your distress when you begin? How much did it decrease after the exercise? This can help you get a better idea of whether a particular technique is working for you.
Grounding techniques can be powerful tools to help you cope with distressing thoughts in the moment. If you’re having trouble using grounding techniques, a therapist may be able to assist.

It’s also important to get help from a therapist so you can address the root cause of your distress. If you don’t have one yet, check out our guide to affordable therapy.

If you need help finding a mental health professional, then check out our FindCare tool here.

Frequently asked questions
What is the 5 4 3 2 1 grounding method or the rule of 5 grounding technique?
This technique asks you to count backward from 5 by thinking of your senses. You begin by noting 5 sounds you can hear and then move through all of your senses until you get to 1.

What does grounding do to your body?
Using grounding techniques can help you manage feelings like:

distress
traumatic flashbacks
nightmares
painful emotions, like anger
anxiety
It’s best to try doing a grounding exercise when you first start to feel bad. Don’t wait for distress to reach a level that’s harder to handle. If the technique doesn’t work at first, try to stick with it for a bit before moving on to another.

What are some grounding techniques for PTSD?
Various grounding techniques can help support you if you’re living with PTSD. This includes focusing on the five senses, doing breathing exercises, or using a grounding mat.

Learn more about grounding types.

How long should you ground each day​?
While there isn’t research on how long you should ground yourself daily, it may be helpful to practice grounding techniques until you return to the present moment and the feeling of distress passes.

If you feel distressed often and find yourself practicing grounding techniques often, it may be worth talking with a mental health professional about what you’re feeling.

Does sitting on the grass count as grounding?
Sitting on the grass can be a grounding activity if you use your senses during the opportunity to move through distress. You can try taking deep breaths or feeling the grass around you.

Can you do too much grounding?
There isn’t a specific amount of time when practicing grounding techniques becomes too much.

However, if you feel that you’re spending a lot of time calming yourself through grounding techniques or that the techniques aren’t working, it may be time to seek outside help if you haven’t already. A therapist or other mental health professional can help you work through distressing thoughts and may offer other techniques to help you find your calm in spite of those thoughts.

How long do you have to ground to get the benefits?
Some of the benefits of grounding may be immediate. You may feel anxious or distressing thoughts depart. You may feel more calm and centered. Regularly practicing grounding may help you get used to returning to the present more quickly when a distressing thought occurs.

It can also potentially increase your practice of mindfulness throughout the day and help reduce negative thoughts.

 

How we reviewed this article:

Sources

History
Share this article

Medically reviewed by Joslyn Jelinek, LCSW, ACSW, RDDP — Written by Crystal Raypole — Updated on February 20, 2025
Was this article helpful?
Yes
No

Read this next
15 Ways to Soothe Your Mind and Body During Times of Distress
Medically reviewed by Marney A. White, PhD, MS
When stress leaves you drained, overwhelmed, and frustrated, self-soothing techniques can help calm tension and improve your outlook.

READ MORE
What Is Breathwork?
Medically reviewed by Kerry Boyle D.Ac., M.S., L.Ac., Dipl. Ac., CYT
Breathwork includes breathing practices and techniques to improve physical or mental well-being. Learn methods, exercises, and things to look out for.

READ MORE
Body Awareness: How to Deepen Your Connection with Your Body
Medically reviewed by Angela M. Bell, MD, FACP
Getting in touch with your body has plenty of benefits.

READ MORE
16 Strategies for Coping with Stress in 30 Minutes or Less
Take control of your stress. Read our tips to help relieve it in 5 minutes, 10 minutes, or 30 minutes.

READ MORE
Here’s How to Use Yoga for Stress Reduction
Medically reviewed by Courtney Sullivan, Certified Yoga Instructor
If you're interested in using yoga for stress reduction, there are a few techniques you'll want to check out. Here's the lowdown.

READ MORE
5 of the Best Apps for Anxiety in 2025
Anxiety comes in many forms, from manageable to very disruptive. In between therapy sessions or other self-care habits, these apps for anxiety may…

READ MORE
Holiday Stress: An 'Invisible Day' Could Help You Reset, Experts Say
Here is how taking an 'invisible day' can help you reset, decompress, and cope with stress, according to experts.

READ MORE
© 2025 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.
About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Privacy Settings
Advertising Policy
Health Topics
Sitemap
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
AboutCareersAdvertise with us
OUR BRANDS

Healthline
Medical News Today
Greatist
Psych Central
Bezzy
